README.md, before:

# 🔬 SKTime ML Forecasting Analysis

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8%2B-blue)](https://www.python.org/)
[![SKTime](https://img.shields.io/badge/SKTime-ML_Compatible-orange)](https://www.sktime.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green)](LICENSE)

## 🌟 Overview

Professional machine learning time series forecasting using SKTime framework. This project demonstrates scikit-learn compatible time series analysis with advanced feature engineering, ML pipelines, and comprehensive model evaluation.

## ✨ Key Features

### 🤖 ML-First Approach
- **Scikit-learn Compatible**: Familiar ML interface for time series
- **Advanced Preprocessing**: Comprehensive transformation pipelines
- **Feature Engineering**: Automated lag features and rolling statistics
- **12+ ML Models**: From linear regression to deep learning
- **Ensemble Methods**: EnsembleForecaster for optimal performance

### 📊 Comprehensive ML Analysis
- **Time Series CV**: Sliding and expanding window validation
- **Hyperparameter Optimization**: Optuna-based automated tuning
- **Feature Importance**: ML model interpretability
- **Performance Benchmarking**: Detailed model comparison across datasets

## 🛠️ Installation & Usage

### Prerequisites
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Run Analysis
```bash
python sktime_analysis.py
```

### Generated Outputs
- `sktime_ml_eda.html` - ML-focused EDA
- `sktime_ml_*.html` - Individual dataset ML dashboards
- `sktime_ml_report.md` - Comprehensive ML analysis report
- `sktime_performance_*.csv` - Detailed performance metrics

## 📦 Core Dependencies

### SKTime Ecosystem
- **sktime[all_extras]**: Complete SKTime installation
- **scikit-learn**: ML algorithms and utilities
- **tsfresh**: Automated feature extraction
- **featuretools**: Advanced feature engineering

### ML & Optimization
- **optuna**: Advanced hyperparameter optimization
- **plotly**: Interactive ML visualizations
- **yfinance**: Real financial data
- **pandas**: Data manipulation and analysis

## 📈 Models Implemented

### Statistical Models
- **ARIMA**: Auto-regressive integrated moving average
- **AutoARIMA**: Automatic ARIMA model selection
- **ExponentialSmoothing**: Holt-Winters exponential smoothing
- **Theta**: Theta forecasting method
- **PolynomialTrend**: Polynomial trend forecasting

### Machine Learning Models
- **Ridge Regression**: L2 regularized linear regression
- **Lasso Regression**: L1 regularized linear regression
- **Random Forest**: Ensemble tree-based forecasting
- **Gradient Boosting**: Advanced gradient boosting
- **Support Vector Regression**: Kernel-based regression

### Deep Learning Models
- **LSTM**: Long Short-Term Memory networks
- **GRU**: Gated Recurrent Units
- **TCN**: Temporal Convolutional Networks

### Ensemble Methods
- **EnsembleForecaster**: SKTime native ensemble
- **Voting Ensemble**: Multiple model combination
- **Stacking Ensemble**: Meta-learning approach

## 🔧 ML Analysis Pipeline

### 1. ML Dataset Loading
```python
# Load ML-optimized datasets
analysis.load_ml_datasets()
# Airline, Economic Indicators, Industrial Production, SPY ETF, Energy
```

### 2. ML-Focused EDA
```python
# Machine learning exploratory analysis
analysis.comprehensive_ml_eda()
# Feature correlations, stationarity, autocorrelation analysis
```

### 3. Preprocessing Pipelines
```python
# Create ML preprocessing pipelines
pipelines = analysis.create_preprocessing_pipelines()
# Detrending, differencing, scaling, feature engineering
```

### 4. ML Model Training
```python
# Train comprehensive ML model suite
analysis.train_and_evaluate_ml_models(dataset_name)
# Statistical, ML, and deep learning models
```

### 5. Advanced Optimization
```python
# ML hyperparameter optimization
analysis.optimize_ml_hyperparameters(dataset_name, 'RandomForest')
analysis.perform_time_series_cv(dataset_name, model_name)
```

## 📊 ML Performance Results

### Model Comparison (SPY ETF Dataset)
| Model | MAE | RMSE | MAPE | CV Score |
|-------|-----|------|------|----------|
| Random Forest | 1.85 | 2.34 | 1.2% | 1.92 ± 0.15 |
| Gradient Boosting | 1.92 | 2.41 | 1.3% | 1.98 ± 0.18 |
| LSTM | 2.05 | 2.58 | 1.4% | 2.12 ± 0.22 |
| Ensemble | 1.78 | 2.28 | 1.1% | 1.85 ± 0.12 |

### Key ML Insights
- **Tree-based models** excel on financial time series
- **Feature engineering** improves performance by 20-30%
- **Ensemble methods** provide best stability and accuracy
- **Cross-validation** essential for reliable performance estimates

## 🎯 ML Applications

### Financial Markets
- **Algorithmic Trading**: ML-based trading strategies
- **Risk Management**: Portfolio risk assessment
- **Market Prediction**: Price movement forecasting
- **Volatility Modeling**: Risk metric prediction

### Industrial Applications
- **Predictive Maintenance**: Equipment failure prediction
- **Quality Control**: Process monitoring and optimization
- **Supply Chain**: Demand and supply forecasting
- **Energy Management**: Load and generation forecasting

### Business Intelligence
- **Customer Analytics**: Behavior prediction
- **Revenue Forecasting**: Business planning
- **Market Analysis**: Competitive intelligence
- **Operational Optimization**: Resource allocation

## 🔬 Advanced ML Features

### Feature Engineering
- **Lag Features**: Historical value integration
- **Rolling Statistics**: Moving averages and volatility
- **Seasonal Features**: Cyclical pattern extraction
- **Technical Indicators**: Financial market features
- **External Features**: Multivariate integration

### Model Selection
- **Automated Selection**: Performance-based ranking
- **Cross-validation**: Time series specific validation
- **Feature Selection**: Automated feature importance
- **Hyperparameter Tuning**: Bayesian optimization

### Interpretability
- **Feature Importance**: ML model explanation
- **SHAP Values**: Advanced model interpretation
- **Residual Analysis**: Model diagnostic tools
- **Performance Decomposition**: Error source analysis

## 📚 Technical ML Architecture

### Pipeline Design
- **Modular Components**: Reusable ML components
- **Preprocessing**: Automated data preparation
- **Feature Engineering**: Scalable feature creation
- **Model Training**: Parallel model execution
- **Evaluation**: Comprehensive performance assessment

### Performance Optimization
- **Parallel Processing**: Multi-core utilization
- **Memory Efficiency**: Large dataset handling
- **Caching**: Intermediate result storage
- **Early Stopping**: Training optimization

### Scalability
- **Batch Processing**: Multiple time series support
- **Distributed Computing**: Cluster deployment
- **Model Serving**: Production deployment
- **Real-time Inference**: Online prediction

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! Please read our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).

### Development Setup
```bash
git clone https://github.com/PabloPoletti/SKTime-ML-Forecasting.git
cd SKTime-ML-Forecasting
pip install -r requirements.txt
python sktime_analysis.py
```

## 📄 License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👨‍💻 Author

**Pablo Poletti** - Economist & Data Scientist
- 🌐 GitHub: [@PabloPoletti](https://github.com/PabloPoletti)
- 📧 Email: lic.poletti@gmail.com
- 💼 LinkedIn: [Pablo Poletti](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pablom-poletti/)

## 🔗 Related Time Series Projects

- 🚀 [TimeGPT Advanced Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/TimeGPT-Advanced-Forecasting) - Nixtla ecosystem showcase
- 🎯 [DARTS Unified Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/DARTS-Unified-Forecasting) - 20+ models with unified API
- 📈 [Prophet Business Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/Prophet-Business-Forecasting) - Business-focused analysis
- 🎯 [GluonTS Probabilistic Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/GluonTS-Probabilistic-Forecasting) - Uncertainty quantification
- ⚡ [PyTorch TFT Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/PyTorch-TFT-Forecasting) - Attention-based deep learning

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [SKTime Team](https://www.sktime.org/) for the excellent ML framework
- [Scikit-learn Community](https://scikit-learn.org/) for ML foundations
- Time series ML research community

---

⭐ **Star this repository if you find SKTime useful for your ML forecasting projects!**

Commit message:

Update README - Emphasize required SKTime library

README.md, after:

# 🔬 SKTime ML Forecasting Analysis

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8%2B-blue)](https://www.python.org/)
[![SKTime](https://img.shields.io/badge/SKTime-ML_Compatible-orange)](https://www.sktime.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green)](LICENSE)

## 🌟 Overview

Professional machine learning time series forecasting using SKTime framework. This project demonstrates scikit-learn compatible time series analysis with advanced feature engineering, ML pipelines, and comprehensive model evaluation.

## ✨ Key Features

### 🤖 ML-First Approach
- **Scikit-learn Compatible**: Familiar ML interface for time series
- **Advanced Preprocessing**: Comprehensive transformation pipelines
- **Feature Engineering**: Automated lag features and rolling statistics
- **12+ ML Models**: From linear regression to deep learning
- **Ensemble Methods**: EnsembleForecaster for optimal performance

### 📊 Comprehensive ML Analysis
- **Time Series CV**: Sliding and expanding window validation
- **Hyperparameter Optimization**: Optuna-based automated tuning
- **Feature Importance**: ML model interpretability
- **Performance Benchmarking**: Detailed model comparison across datasets

## 🛠️ Installation & Usage

### ⚠️ Required Libraries
**This project specifically requires SKTime to function properly:**

```bash
# Core SKTime library - REQUIRED
pip install sktime[all_extras]

# Or install all requirements
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Note:** Without SKTime, the ML forecasting analysis cannot proceed. The project will exit with clear installation instructions if dependencies are missing.

### Run Analysis
```bash
python sktime_analysis.py
```

### Generated Outputs
- `sktime_ml_eda.html` - ML-focused EDA
- `sktime_ml_*.html` - Individual dataset ML dashboards
- `sktime_ml_report.md` - Comprehensive ML analysis report
- `sktime_performance_*.csv` - Detailed performance metrics

## 📦 Core Dependencies

### SKTime Ecosystem
- **sktime[all_extras]**: Complete SKTime installation
- **scikit-learn**: ML algorithms and utilities
- **tsfresh**: Automated feature extraction
- **featuretools**: Advanced feature engineering

### ML & Optimization
- **optuna**: Advanced hyperparameter optimization
- **plotly**: Interactive ML visualizations
- **yfinance**: Real financial data
- **pandas**: Data manipulation and analysis

## 📈 Models Implemented

### Statistical Models
- **ARIMA**: Auto-regressive integrated moving average
- **AutoARIMA**: Automatic ARIMA model selection
- **ExponentialSmoothing**: Holt-Winters exponential smoothing
- **Theta**: Theta forecasting method
- **PolynomialTrend**: Polynomial trend forecasting

### Machine Learning Models
- **Ridge Regression**: L2 regularized linear regression
- **Lasso Regression**: L1 regularized linear regression
- **Random Forest**: Ensemble tree-based forecasting
- **Gradient Boosting**: Advanced gradient boosting
- **Support Vector Regression**: Kernel-based regression

### Deep Learning Models
- **LSTM**: Long Short-Term Memory networks
- **GRU**: Gated Recurrent Units
- **TCN**: Temporal Convolutional Networks

### Ensemble Methods
- **EnsembleForecaster**: SKTime native ensemble
- **Voting Ensemble**: Multiple model combination
- **Stacking Ensemble**: Meta-learning approach

## 🔧 ML Analysis Pipeline

### 1. ML Dataset Loading
```python
# Load ML-optimized datasets
analysis.load_ml_datasets()
# Airline, Economic Indicators, Industrial Production, SPY ETF, Energy
```

### 2. ML-Focused EDA
```python
# Machine learning exploratory analysis
analysis.comprehensive_ml_eda()
# Feature correlations, stationarity, autocorrelation analysis
```

### 3. Preprocessing Pipelines
```python
# Create ML preprocessing pipelines
pipelines = analysis.create_preprocessing_pipelines()
# Detrending, differencing, scaling, feature engineering
```

### 4. ML Model Training
```python
# Train comprehensive ML model suite
analysis.train_and_evaluate_ml_models(dataset_name)
# Statistical, ML, and deep learning models
```

### 5. Advanced Optimization
```python
# ML hyperparameter optimization
analysis.optimize_ml_hyperparameters(dataset_name, 'RandomForest')
analysis.perform_time_series_cv(dataset_name, model_name)
```

## 📊 ML Performance Results

### Model Comparison (SPY ETF Dataset)
| Model | MAE | RMSE | MAPE | CV Score |
|-------|-----|------|------|----------|
| Random Forest | 1.85 | 2.34 | 1.2% | 1.92 ± 0.15 |
| Gradient Boosting | 1.92 | 2.41 | 1.3% | 1.98 ± 0.18 |
| LSTM | 2.05 | 2.58 | 1.4% | 2.12 ± 0.22 |
| Ensemble | 1.78 | 2.28 | 1.1% | 1.85 ± 0.12 |

### Key ML Insights
- **Tree-based models** excel on financial time series
- **Feature engineering** improves performance by 20-30%
- **Ensemble methods** provide best stability and accuracy
- **Cross-validation** essential for reliable performance estimates

## 🎯 ML Applications

### Financial Markets
- **Algorithmic Trading**: ML-based trading strategies
- **Risk Management**: Portfolio risk assessment
- **Market Prediction**: Price movement forecasting
- **Volatility Modeling**: Risk metric prediction

### Industrial Applications
- **Predictive Maintenance**: Equipment failure prediction
- **Quality Control**: Process monitoring and optimization
- **Supply Chain**: Demand and supply forecasting
- **Energy Management**: Load and generation forecasting

### Business Intelligence
- **Customer Analytics**: Behavior prediction
- **Revenue Forecasting**: Business planning
- **Market Analysis**: Competitive intelligence
- **Operational Optimization**: Resource allocation

## 🔬 Advanced ML Features

### Feature Engineering
- **Lag Features**: Historical value integration
- **Rolling Statistics**: Moving averages and volatility
- **Seasonal Features**: Cyclical pattern extraction
- **Technical Indicators**: Financial market features
- **External Features**: Multivariate integration

### Model Selection
- **Automated Selection**: Performance-based ranking
- **Cross-validation**: Time series specific validation
- **Feature Selection**: Automated feature importance
- **Hyperparameter Tuning**: Bayesian optimization

### Interpretability
- **Feature Importance**: ML model explanation
- **SHAP Values**: Advanced model interpretation
- **Residual Analysis**: Model diagnostic tools
- **Performance Decomposition**: Error source analysis

## 📚 Technical ML Architecture

### Pipeline Design
- **Modular Components**: Reusable ML components
- **Preprocessing**: Automated data preparation
- **Feature Engineering**: Scalable feature creation
- **Model Training**: Parallel model execution
- **Evaluation**: Comprehensive performance assessment

### Performance Optimization
- **Parallel Processing**: Multi-core utilization
- **Memory Efficiency**: Large dataset handling
- **Caching**: Intermediate result storage
- **Early Stopping**: Training optimization

### Scalability
- **Batch Processing**: Multiple time series support
- **Distributed Computing**: Cluster deployment
- **Model Serving**: Production deployment
- **Real-time Inference**: Online prediction

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! Please read our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).

### Development Setup
```bash
git clone https://github.com/PabloPoletti/SKTime-ML-Forecasting.git
cd SKTime-ML-Forecasting
pip install -r requirements.txt
python sktime_analysis.py
```

## 📄 License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👨‍💻 Author

**Pablo Poletti** - Economist & Data Scientist
- 🌐 GitHub: [@PabloPoletti](https://github.com/PabloPoletti)
- 📧 Email: lic.poletti@gmail.com
- 💼 LinkedIn: [Pablo Poletti](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pablom-poletti/)

## 🔗 Related Time Series Projects

- 🚀 [TimeGPT Advanced Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/TimeGPT-Advanced-Forecasting) - Nixtla ecosystem showcase
- 🎯 [DARTS Unified Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/DARTS-Unified-Forecasting) - 20+ models with unified API
- 📈 [Prophet Business Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/Prophet-Business-Forecasting) - Business-focused analysis
- 🎯 [GluonTS Probabilistic Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/GluonTS-Probabilistic-Forecasting) - Uncertainty quantification
- ⚡ [PyTorch TFT Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/PyTorch-TFT-Forecasting) - Attention-based deep learning

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [SKTime Team](https://www.sktime.org/) for the excellent ML framework
- [Scikit-learn Community](https://scikit-learn.org/) for ML foundations
- Time series ML research community

---

⭐ **Star this repository if you find SKTime useful for your ML forecasting projects!**
